# Haiti Cholera Dataset

The data for this lab is a set of whole genome sequencing data from a number of *V. Cholerae* strains from the [outbreak of cholera in Haiti][haiti-cholera] beginning in 2010 as well as a number of other *V. cholerae* strains included for comparison.  This data was previously published in <http://mbio.asm.org/content/4/4/e00398-13.abstract> and <http://mbio.asm.org/content/2/4/e00157-11.abstract> and is available on NCBI's [Sequence Read Archive](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/).  You can view a table of the data at [metadata.tsv][].

Please use the [SNVPhyl][] phylogenomics pipeline to construct a whole genome phylogeny of this data. You may find the input data under `~/CourseData/IDGE_data/VCholerae_SNVPhyl`. The reference file should be `reference/2010EL-1786.fasta` and the fastq files should be in `fastq/`. This data was reduced to an average coverage of 12X to speed up execution, so please use a minimum coverage of 4X.  The pipeline can be run with the command `/usr/local/snvphyl-galaxy-cli/bin/snvphyl.py`. This should take ~16 minutes to complete.

1. Examine the output file `vcf2core.tsv` for the percentage of the reference genome with sufficient read coverage and quality to be used by SNVPhyl to produce the phylogenetic tree (**Percentage of all positions that are valid, included, and part of the core genome**). Typically, values from 80-90%+ indiciate that all isolates share in common a sufficient proporition of genomic content (core genome) which do not exist in repetitive or other problematic regions. Was a sufficient proportion used for this dataset?

   *Note: You can print file contents with `cat`, but this leaves columns unaligned. To print with properly aligned columns you can use the command `column`, and you can use the command `cut` to slice out particular columns from a tabular text file. For example, `cut -f 1,2,7 [filename.tsv] | column -s  $'\t' -t`.*

2. Examine the output file `filterStats.txt` to see a summary of the number of SNVs identified, and the number removed due to the SNV filtering steps in SNVPhyl. How many SNV sites were used to generate the phylogeny? How many were removed?

3. Using the phylogenetic tree depicited in [Figure 1 from "Population Genetics of Vibrio cholerae from Nepal in 2010: Evidence on the Origin of the Haitian Outbreak"][pop-vc-f1].

   1. Compare the phylogenetic tree generated using SNVPhyl with the above phylogenetic tree. Are the isolates grouped in a similar way?

      *Note: Isolates labeled as __VC-XX__ or __2010EL-XXXX__ in the data for this lab are missing __VC__ and __2010EL__ in this published phylogenetic tree (e.g., VC-25 becomes 25). Some isolates in the data presented for this lab are not present in this particular published phylogenetic tree.*

   2. Compare the SNV distance matrix generated by SNVPhyl (`snvMatrix.tsv`) to the SNV (SNP) counts show in red on **Figure 1**. In particular compare the **reference (1786)** to **VC-6, VC-19, VC-26, VC-18, VC-25**.  In Figure 1, to get the total SNV count between **1786**and the other isolates, add up all the red numbers on path connecting 1786 to the other isolates.  For example, between **1786** and **18** there are *7 + 7 + 1 = 15 SNVs*. Are there any numbers that do not match? Can you think of a reason for this?

[pop-vc-f1]: http://mbio.asm.org/content/2/4/e00157-11/F1.expansion.html
[haiti-cholera]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2010%E2%80%9313_Haiti_cholera_outbreak
[metadata.tsv]: metadata.tsv
[SNVPhyl]: https://snvphyl.readthedocs.io
